Page 1 of 6 
 
 
 
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA 
 
INFORMATION HANDOUT  
Paper 2 of Phase II of Information Technology Stream 
  
This handout contains details about various aspects of the online programming test 
i.e Paper 2 of Phase II of Information Technology Stream that you are going to 
undertake and important instructions about the related matters. You are advised to 
read the handout carefully as it will help you in preparing for the examination.  
The candidates should reach the venue at least 60 minutes before the start of the 
exam.  
1. Total duration of the programming test shall be Three hours and 30 minutes 
i.e 30 minutes of reading time for candidates to read the questions at the 
start of the examination, during which typing on “Parikshak” shall be 
blocked and 3 Hours for solving the questions on “Parikshak”  . 
 
2. The programming test will comprise of nine (9) questions of diff erent 
complexity as mentioned below:  
Complexity 
Type 
Questions needs to be solved Maximum Marks per 
Question 
Simple  3 out of 4 10 
Medium  2 out of 3 20 
High  1 out of 2 30 
  
The maximum marks for each complexity type is as mentioned below: 
 
Complexity Type Maximum Marks 
Simple  30 
Medium  40 
High  30 
Total Maximum Marks for 
Paper 2 i.e programming test 
100 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 6 
 
Please note: 
● There shall be 4 questions of Simple complexity from which candidates 
needs to solve any 3 questions.  
 
● There shall be 3 questions of Medium complexity from which 
candidates needs to solve any 2 questions.  
 
● There shall be 2 questions of High complexity from which candidates 
needs to solve any 1 question.  
 
In case any candidates solves more than the required no. of questions for any 
complexity type, while evaluation, questions where the candidate is getting 
lowest marks shall not be considered.  
 
Example: In case a candidate solves all 4 questions related to Simple 
Complexity type and during evaluation, the maximum marks obtained by the 
candidate is 10, 6, 8 & 8 for those problems, the question where the marks 
obtained by the candidate is lowest i.e 6 marks shall not be considered and 
the candidate shall be awarded a total of 26 marks (10+8+8) out of maximum 
30 marks for Simple Complexity type. 
 
3. The program for any of the questions can be submitted to the system (“Submit 
to Grader”) any number of times during the duration of the examination. 
 
4. Questions can be solved in any order. However, it is recommended to solve in 
the increasing order of complexity. Further, in case candidates starts a 
particular questions and is facing difficulty to solve the same, he/she can 
select another question and start solving the same.   
 
Candidates shall be able to attempt the unsolved attempted question later 
during the remaining duration of the examination.  
 
5. After entering the exam in the Parikshak environment, do not close your 
test by clicking the “Close Test”  button at the bottom unless you are 
sure to exit the exam. If you exit by closing your test you will not be 
allowed to enter again. 
6. Programming languages that can be used to solve questions are as follows: 
For SEBI’s exam, Parikhak allows only the following 3 programming 
languages and versions as mentioned below: 
Language Version 
C++ (GCC) 9.3 
Java 1.8 
Python 3.5 
Page 3 of 6 
 
7. There is no restriction on using the default libraries provided by programming 
languages, except for a few malicious functions, the system will prompt you 
when you try to use those functions.  
 
8. After writing a program for any question and submitting it to the grader, the 
system will compile, and if compilation is successful then test the program 
against system inputs (test cases). There may be multiple system test cases 
for each question (minimum of 5 test cases shall be there). If the program’s 
output for any test case is as expected then the system will show output as 
“Y” else “X” shall be shown as output.  
 
9. For any question, if you get two or more “Y” for the test cases, your 
submitted code shall be considered for evaluation and based upon the 
number of “Y” you will be assigned marks proportionally  (For example, if 
you get three “Y” for 6 test cases, you will get ½ of the maximum marks 
assigned for that question. If you get one “Y” then you will get 0 marks. If you 
get 4 “Y” for 6 test cases then you will get ⅔ of the maximum marks assigned 
for that question. If you get 6 “Y” for 6 test cases then you will get the 
maximum marks assigned for that question.). 
 
10. For any question, if you have multiple submissions to the grader, then the 
attempt having a maximum number of “Y” would be considered for evaluation. 
 
11. Once you are satisfied with your submitted programs and you want to 
exit the exam then you can do so by clicking the “Close Test” button. 
However, you will not be allowed to leave the examination hall befo re 
the completion of the exam duration. 
 
12. After the expiry of duration of the exam, the program(s) would be saved 
automatically by the computer system even if the candidate has not clicked 
the “Close Test” button. 
 
13. Candidates are advised to refer to the att ached Parikshak manual for 
more details about the programming environment. 
Disclaimer: Parikshak program grading is purely input/output based. SEBI/test 
conducting body reserves the right to manually examine the submitted code 
against malpractices and repo rted errors related to problem specifications. When 
there is adequate ground, SEBI/test conducting body may override Parikshak's 
verdict by granting/denying credit. 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 6 
 
General Instructions: 
1. Please note the date, Reporting time, and venue address of the examination 
given in the call letter.   
2. You may visit the venue one day before the Online Examination to confirm the 
location so that you can report on time (as printed on the call letter) on the 
day of the examination. Latecomers will not be allowed. 
 
3. The call letter should be brought with you to the examination venue along with 
your recent passport -size photograph duly pasted on it. (Preferably the same 
photograph as was as uploaded). 
 
4. You must scrupulously follow the instructions of the Test Administrato r and 
SEBI Representative at the examination venue. If you violate the instructions 
you will be disqualified and will be asked to leave the examination venue. 
 
5. No use of calculators (separate or with a watch), books, notebooks or written 
notes, or any othe r electronic device will be allowed during the examination. 
Candidates will be required to switch off their mobile phones, and 
deposit it at the designated location, to be collected while exiting.  
 
6. Please bring the call letter with your photograph affixed  thereon, currently 
valid Photo identity proof in original and a photocopy of the same ID proof 
which you bring in original - THIS IS ESSENTIAL. The call letter along with 
a photocopy of photo identity proof duly stapled together are to be 
submitted at the  end of the exam.  Currently valid photo identity proof may 
be PAN Card/Passport/Permanent Driving Licence/Voter’s Card  with 
photograph/Bank Passbook with photograph/Photo Identity proof issued by a 
Gazetted Officer on official letterhead along with photograph/Photo Identity 
proof issued by a People’s Representative on official letterhead along with the 
photograph/Valid recent Identity Card issued by a recognized College/  
University/Aadhaar Card/E-Aadhaar Card with a photograph/  Employee ID in 
original/Bar Council Identity card with photograph. Please Note - Ration Card 
and Learner’s Driving License will not be accepted as valid ID proof for 
this purpose.  Please note that your name as appearing on the call letter 
(provided by you during the process of registration) should exactly match the 
name as appears on the photo identity proof. Female candidates who have 
changed first/last/middle name post marriage must take special note of this. If 
there is any mismatch between the name indicated in the Call Lett er and 
Photo Identity Proof you will not be allowed to appear for the exam. 
 
7. A candidate who is or has been declared by SEBI guilty of impersonation or of 
submitting fabricated document/s which have been tampered with or of 
making statements that are incor rect or false or of suppressing material 
information or otherwise resorting to any other irregular or improper means of 
obtaining admission to examination or of using or attempting to use unfair 
means in the examination hall or misbehavior in the examinati on hall may be 
Page 5 of 6 
 
debarred permanently or for a specified period by SEBI from admission to any 
examination or appearance at any interview held by it for selection of the 
candidates. SEBI may take further action against such candidates as deemed 
fit by it. 
 
8. Any candidate who is found copying or receiving or giving assistance or 
engaging in any behavior unbecoming of a candidate will not be considered 
for assessment. SEBI may take further action against such candidates as 
deemed fit by it. 
 
9. The possibility of occurrence of some problem in the administration of the 
examination cannot be ruled out completely which may impact test delivery 
and/or result from being generated. In that event, every effort will be made to 
rectify such problems, whic h may include the movement of candidates, and 
delay in test. Conduct of a re -exam is at the absolute discretion of the test 
conducting body. Candidates will not have any claim for a re -test. Candidates 
not willing to move or not willing to participate in t he delayed process of test 
delivery shall be summarily rejected from the process.  
 
10. You will have to affix your signature and left thumb impression, in the space 
provided in the call letter, in the presence of the Invigilator. Candidates must 
bring their own blue/black stamp pad for affixing thumb impressions. 
 
11. If the examination is held in more than one session for a post/stream, the 
scores across various sessions will be equated to adjust for slight differences 
in the difficulty level of different test batteries used across sessions. More than 
one session is required if the nodes' capacity is less or some technical 
disruption takes place at any center or for any candidate. 
 
12. Anyone found to be disclosing, publishing, reproducing, transmitting, storing, 
or f acilitating transmission and storage of test contents in any form or any 
information therein in whole or part thereof or by any means verbal or written, 
electronic or mechanical or taking away the papers supplied in the 
examination hall or found to be in u nauthorised possession of test content is 
likely to be prosecuted. 
 
13. Instances of providing incorrect information and/or process violation by a 
candidate detected at any stage of the selection, the process will lead to 
disqualification of the candidate from the selection process and he/she will not 
be allowed to appear in any recruitment process of the SEBI in the future. If 
such instances go undetected during the current selection process but are 
detected subsequently, such disqualification will take place with retrospective 
effect. 
 
14. (i) The PwBD candidates, who want to use the facility of the scribe, MUST go 
through the detailed advertisement which is available on the SEBI website 
and carefully READ the instructions. 
 
Page 6 of 6 
 
(ii) These candidates are also required  to submit a Joint 
Undertaking/Declaration form (Scribe declaration form) that can be 
downloaded from the SEBI website. 
 
CONDUCT OF EXAM-RELATED INSTRUCTIONS  
 
 
1. Candidate is required to report at the exam venue strictly as per the time slot 
mentioned in the Call Letter. It is expected that candidates strictly adhere to 
this time slot – as entry into the exam venue will be provided based upon the 
individual’s time slot ONLY. Candidates should report at least 60 minutes 
before the Reporting time indicated on the call Letter.  
 
2. Mapping of ‘Candidate Roll Number and the Lab Number’ will NOT be 
displayed outside the exam venue, but the same will be intimated to the 
candidates individually at the time of the entry of the candidate to the exam 
venue. 
 
3. Candidates will be permitted to carry only the following items with them 
into the venue: 
a. Mask (optional) 
b. Personal transparent water bottle (Candidate should bring his / her 
water bottle) 
c. A simple pen and ink stamp pad   
d. Exam-related documents (Call Letter and Photocopy of the ID card 
stapled with it, ID Card in Original.) 
e. Call Letter should be brought with the Photocopy of the Photo ID 
stapled with it. Original ID (same as Photocopy) is also to be brought 
for verification. The name on the ID and the Call Letter should be the 
same.  
f. In case of Scribe Candidates - Scribe form duly filled and signed with 
Photograph affixed. 
        No other Items are permitted inside the venue. 
 
4. Candidate should not share any of their personal belonging/material with 
anyone. 
 
5. Candidate should maintain safe social distance with one another. 
 
6. Candidate should stand in the row as per the instructions provided at venue. 
 
7. Candidates will be required to switch off their mobile phones, and deposit it at 
the designated location, to be collected while exiting. 
 
8. Post Examination Control:- 
● On completion of the examination, the candidates should move out in an 
orderly manner without crowding as instructed by the venue staff. 
WISH YOU GOOD LUCK 